doc/md: Fly.io guide (#1361)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/guides/deploying/flyio.mdx

In this guide, we will demonstrate how Atlas can be used to perform database schema migrations for Fly.io deployments process using a Dockerfile.
We will assume that you have already have a Fly project and are able to deploy it, if you are new to Fly, [check the getting started guide](https://fly.io/docs/speedrun/).

## Release command

When you configure your Fly project, you can define a _release command_. This command is executed during the release phase, before the new version of your application is deployed.  If it fails, i.e exits with a status other than zero, Fly marks the deployment as failed mas well. The release command is the
[recommended way](https://fly.io/docs/reference/configuration/#the-deploy-section) to run database migrations on Fly.

:::note
The release command only allows executing commands that are present in the application image, meaning that we
have to embed the Atlas binary with our application. [We usually suggest a separate step for handling the
migration](https://atlasgo.io/guides/deploying/intro#running-migrations-as-part-of-deployment-pipelines),
but since this is a requirement from Fly, we don't have an option.
:::

## Defining the Dockerfile

> Using Docker multi-stage builds, we can create an easy-to-use Dockerfile. In this guide we will use a Go app as an example.
> Suppose our project structure is similar to the one below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Docker multi-stage builds, we can compose lightweight images from multiple steps that use heavier base images. In this guide, we will use a Go app as an example so we can use a step for building the target binary and a separate one for producing the runtime container, that does not need to include the build tools at all.

Suppose our project structure is similar to the one below:
```

```text
.
├── fly.toml
├── go.mod
├── go.sum
├── main.go
└── migrations
    ├── 20221220000101_create_users.sql
    └── atlas.sum
```

Our objective is to build an image that contains the Atlas binary, the database migrations and our application code. For
our Go app the Dockerfile can be defined as:

```dockerfile title="Dockerfile"
FROM arigaio/atlas:latest as atlas

# app stage
FROM golang:1.19.2-bullseye as build
WORKDIR /build
ADD go.mod /build/go.mod
ADD go.sum /build/go.sum
ADD main.go /build/main.go
RUN go build -o app main.go

# final stage

> FROM ubuntu

Reviewer: ubuntu is a fairly heavy image and contains lots of unrequired stuff. can we use a distroless base image? 
you can include busybox in there or similar if needed.

Reviewer: or at least a slim alpine image?

Author: It's possible with `arigaio/atlas:latest-alpine`

Since we require `sh` `distroless` alone won't work, using the [debug](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless#debug-images) version (that adds `busybox`) is possible and works (with a minor `Dockerfile` change)
```
FROM gcr.io/distroless/base-debian11:debug
COPY --from=atlas /atlas /atlas
COPY migrations /migrations
COPY --from=build /build/app /app
ENTRYPOINT [] # <-- required
CMD ["/app"]
```
We get a warning on the logs, but everything works.
```
could not setup swap: could not find `mkswap`, you need to install the correct util package for your distribution
 ```
 
I choose to use alpine.
- `alpine`:  81MB
- `distroless`: 95MB

Should we explain this on the guide?

Reviewer: No it's fine. As long as we have it some thought 😉

COPY --from=atlas /atlas /atlas
COPY migrations /migrations

COPY --from=build /build/app /app
CMD ["/app"]
```

If you are using a different programming language, most of the time you will only have to change the app stage.
If your application requires a runtime you may have to change the final stage as well.

:::info
It's important for the final image to have a shell that is capable of environment variable interpolation, like `sh` or `bash`. This is mostly
a [behavior on Fly's side](https://community.fly.io/t/using-env-variables-in-release-command/7186),

> where expanding environment variables don't seem to work correctly on the release command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where expanding environment variables don't currently work correctly on the release command.
```

:::

## Setting the database URL secret

While running the migration, Atlas needs to know the URL for the database. Fly has support for

> defining [secrets](https://fly.io/docs/reference/secrets/), sensible values that are available during runtime as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defining [secrets](https://fly.io/docs/reference/secrets/), sensitive values that are available during runtime as
```

environment variables. We can define the database URL using the command below:

```
flyctl secrets set DATABASE_URL="postgres://postgres:pass@0.0.0.0:5432/database?sslmode=disable"
```

If you use the **flyctl** command `postgres attach` the
secret [will be created automatically for you](https://fly.io/docs/postgres/managing/attach-detach/#attach-a-fly-app).

## Configuring `fly.toml`

To tell Fly to execute the release command during a deployment, we need to add a `deploy` block with the release
command provided:

```toml title="fly.toml"
[deploy]

> release_command = "sh -c '/atlas migrate apply --url $DATABASE_URL'"

Reviewer: 👍

---
id: fly.io
slug: /guides/deploying/fly.io
title: Using Atlas with Fly.io
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

[Fly.io](https://fly.io/) is a platform for running full stack apps and databases close to the users. Under the hood, Fly

> converts Docker images (OCI images) to [Firecracker microVMs](https://firecracker-microvm.github.io/). Fly allows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
converts Docker images (or other OCI-compliant image formats) to [Firecracker microVMs](https://firecracker-microvm.github.io/). Fly allows
```

the deployment of the app in different regions and routing requests based on the user latency.

> Apps on Fly can be [deployed in one of three ways](https://fly.io/docs/reference/builders/), using a Dockerfile, a
> Docker image or a buildpack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apps on Fly can be [deployed in one of three ways](https://fly.io/docs/reference/builders/): using a Dockerfile, a
Docker image or a buildpack.
```
link to buildpack intro

Reviewer: also add a link to intro buildpack

> In this guide, we will demonstrate how Atlas can be integrated with the Fly.io deployment process by using a Dockerfile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we will demonstrate how Atlas can be used to perform database schema migrations for Fly.io deployments process using a Dockerfile.
```

> We will assume that you have already have a Fly project and are able to deploy it.

Reviewer: link to a relevant getting started guide if the user needs help

## Release command

> Fly supports running a command during a new release. The command is only executed during the release phase and
> if it exits with a status other than zero, Fly marks the deployment as failed. The release command is the
> [recommended way](https://fly.io/docs/reference/configuration/#the-deploy-section) to run database migrations on Fly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you configure your Fly project, you can define a _release command_. This command is executed during the release phase, before the new version of your application is deployed.  If it fails, i.e exits with a status other than zero, Fly marks the deployment as failed mas well. The release command is the
[recommended way](https://fly.io/docs/reference/configuration/#the-deploy-section) to run database migrations on Fly.
```

> When you configure your Fly project, you can define a _release command_. This command is executed during the release phase, before the new version of your application is deployed.  If it fails, i.e exits with a status other than zero, Fly marks the deployment as failed mas well. The release command is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you configure your Fly project, you can define a _release command_. This command is executed during the release phase before the new version of your application is deployed.  If it fails, i.e exits with a status code other than zero, Fly marks the deployment as failed as well. The release command is the
```

:::note
The release command only allows executing commands that are present in the application image, meaning that we
have to embed the Atlas binary with our application. [We usually suggest a separate step for handling the
migration](https://atlasgo.io/guides/deploying/intro#running-migrations-as-part-of-deployment-pipelines),

> but since this is a requirement from Fly, we don't have an option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but since this is a Fly currently does not support providing a separate image for the release phase, we recommend this solution.
```

:::

## Defining the Dockerfile

> Using Docker multi-stage builds, we can compose lightweight images from multiple steps that use heavier base images. In this guide, we will use a Go app as an example so we can use a step for building the target binary and a separate one for producing the runtime container, that does not need to include the build tools at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Docker multi-stage builds, we can compose lightweight images from multiple steps that use heavier base images. In this guide, we will use a Go app as an example. Because Go is a compiled language, so we can use a separate step for building the target binary and another for producing the runtime container. This way the runtime environment can be smaller, omitting the build environment.
```

Suppose our project structure is similar to the one below:

```text
.
├── fly.toml
├── go.mod
├── go.sum
├── main.go
└── migrations
    ├── 20221220000101_create_users.sql
    └── atlas.sum
```

Our objective is to build an image that contains the Atlas binary, the database migrations and our application code. For
our Go app the Dockerfile can be defined as:

```dockerfile title="Dockerfile"
FROM arigaio/atlas:latest-alpine as atlas

> # app stage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# build stage
```

FROM golang:1.19.2-bullseye as build
WORKDIR /build
ADD go.mod /build/go.mod
ADD go.sum /build/go.sum
ADD main.go /build/main.go
RUN CGO_ENABLED=0 go build -o app main.go

> # final stage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# runtime stage
```

> # final stage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# runtime stage
```

FROM alpine
COPY --from=atlas /atlas /atlas
COPY migrations /migrations

COPY --from=build /build/app /app
CMD ["/app"]
```

> If you are using a different programming language, most of the time you will only have to change the app stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using another compiled programming language, most of the time you will only have to change the build stage.
```

If your application requires a runtime you may have to change the final stage as well.

:::info
It's important for the final image to have a shell that is capable of environment variable interpolation, like `sh` or `bash`. This is mostly

> a [behavior on Fly's side](https://community.fly.io/t/using-env-variables-in-release-command/7186),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
due to [behavior on Fly's side](https://community.fly.io/t/using-env-variables-in-release-command/7186),
```

where expanding environment variables don't seem to work correctly on the release command.
:::

## Setting the database url secret

While running the migration, Atlas needs to know the URL for the database, Fly has support for
defining [secrets](https://fly.io/docs/reference/secrets/), sensible values that are available during runtime as
environment variables. We can define the database url using the command below:

```
flyctl secrets set DATABASE_URL="postgres://postgres:pass@0.0.0.0:5432/database?sslmode=disable"
```

If you use the **flyctl** command `postgres attach` the
secret [will be created automatically for you](https://fly.io/docs/postgres/managing/attach-detach/#attach-a-fly-app).

## Configuring `fly.toml`

> To tell Fly to execute the release command during a deployment, we only have to add a `deploy` block with the release

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To tell Fly to execute the release command during a deployment, we need to add a `deploy` block with the release
```

command provided:

```toml title="fly.toml"
[deploy]
release_command = "bash -c '/atlas migrate apply --url $DATABASE_URL'"
```

With the release command defined, during new deployments a new temporary VM will be created and will execute the release

> command, if the commands succeed the deployment will continue, in case of failures the deployment will be aborted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
command. If the commands succeed the deployment will continue, in case of failures the deployment will be aborted.
```

## Deploying the app

> We can deploy the app with the command `flyctl deploy`, Fly will use a Docker installation (or a remote builder) to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can deploy the app with the command `flyctl deploy`. Fly will use a Docker installation (or a remote builder) to
```

> build the Docker image and push to Fly registry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
build the Docker image and push to the Fly registry.
```

]}>
<TabItem value="first_deploy">

```text
Preparing to run: `/atlas migrate apply --env prod` as root
Migrating to version 20221220000101 (1 migrations in total):
migrating version 20221220000101
-> CREATE TABLE "public"."users" ("id" integer NOT NULL, "name" character varying(100) NULL, PRIMARY KEY ("id"));
-- ok (6.204945ms)
 -------------------------
-- 12.69747ms
-- 1 migrations
-- 1 sql statements
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="second_deploy">

```text
Preparing to run: `/atlas migrate apply --env prod` as root
No migration files to execute
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="checksum_mismatch">

```text
Preparing to run: `/atlas migrate apply --env prod` as root
You have a checksum error in your migration directory.
This happens if you manually create or edit a migration file.
Please check your migration files and run
'atlas migrate hash'
to re-hash the contents and resolve the error
Error: checksum mismatch
Error release command failed, deployment aborted
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Improving the deployment pipeline

You can always improve the deployment pipeline by leveraging [Atlas](https://atlasgo.io/integrations/github-actions)

> and [Fly](https://fly.io/docs/app-guides/continuous-deployment-with-github-actions/) Github action, for even more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and [Fly](https://fly.io/docs/app-guides/continuous-deployment-with-github-actions/) Github actions. For additional
```

> insight of the migrations and database schema we recommend giving a try to [Ariga Cloud](https://atlasgo.io/cloud/getting-started).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
insights on the database schema and migrations, we recommend giving [Ariga Cloud](https://atlasgo.io/cloud/getting-started) a try.
```
